very much opposed to. I'm opposed to public policy
trying to direct research towards specific
relevant goals. Not because the goals aren't
worthy, but because I think that we're not smart
enough to know how to do that properly. I'm quite a
fan of basic research, which then when you then
look at and find out what results from basic
research can be turned into focused strategic
results at a later date. I think a good example,
just a personal anecdote from people I've known,
Ron Prinn at MIT was a student when I was there
working with John Lewis. And he worked on the
photochemistry of the Jupiter atmosphere. And he
was tremendously excited, as we all were, about
the things emerging, about the new knowledge of
the chemistry of the solar nebula and the
atmosphere of the planets. And Ron has since
become one of the leaders in the details of the
photochemistry of the Earth's atmosphere as
well, including the destruction of ozone and the
chemistry in the atmosphere leading to those
types of things. You could never have started out a
program in your wildest dreams that said, I want
somebody to go study the chemistry of Jupiter's
clouds in order to solve the ozone layer problem.
That is not the way science works. And
unfortunately, a lot of the people
in Washington are just totally misguided in this
sense, mostly because of background. They're
mostly lawyers. That is not the way you set up a
scientific program to develop the things you need
for public policy. And I think as scientists it's
our duty to, even though it's nice to sell a program
and try to get lots of bucks for particular
relevancy, to try to step back a little bit and
educate and provide good advice to the government
that we need the broad-based research in order to
have the successful focused research. A lot's
been made of our, this is an area that I'm not
personally connected with, but a lot's been made
of our interactions with the Japanese over the
years and the fact that they have exploited a lot of
microchip technology and things like that. A lot
of that basic research, if you go back, I believe
you will find was done here. And it wasn't that
anybody wasn't focused properly here. It's that
the people didn't take and develop the industrial
government relationships to use that basic
science for economic ends as well here as they did
in Japan. I think if you started off trying to find
the next thing in that area and focus all of your
research on that, you're probably missing what
will really be the big payoff because you don't
know what it is. It's out there someplace in basic
research.
Here's the penultimate question, and it's wildly
different. At the beginning of this century,
planetary astronomy was a respected part, a large
part of the general field of astronomy. People
like Henry Norris Russell wrote papers on the
upper atmosphere and clouds of Venus. By the end of
World War II, it was essentially dead. Who killed
planetary astronomy? Well, that was before my
time, of course. It's before everybody's time, so
I have to ask. My, well, you might find a few still.
Gee, isn't, what's his name? Vanderholtz is still
around, isn't he? Yeah. I guess my perspective on
that, and it comes from what study I've done of the
history of science, is that my guess is that
Percival Lowell killed it off. Gerard de
Bacalure, that was... That was what he said, just
two words. And then there's also the comment that,
really, when you think about it, there wasn't much
people could do with the photographic plates that
they had to take spectra. Photometry was no good.
And they kind of ran up against a brick wall in
learning anything physically about the planets.
Yeah. I also think perhaps dead is not as, if you
look at the overall field of planetary science as
opposed to specifically going to the telescope
and making physical observations of the planets,
it was not that dead. There was still celestial
mechanics going on and research into orbital
theory and things of that sort. In fact, going into
the early ages, parts of the space age, if you look
at kind of a broader base thing. But specifically
with respect to telescopic work that our brother
astronomers would regard as astronomy, I think
that the taint of getting involved with the types
of
social images that became associated with
Percival Lowell and the little green men on Mars
and canals and so forth drove off a lot of people.
And I think your point about technology is an
important one. I think that in addition to a few key
individuals like Gerard Kuiper getting involved
in planetary astronomy, the resurgence of
planetary astronomy had a lot to do with
technology. that evolved past the photographic
plate, past World War II particularly,
photoelectric and infrared sensors and the rest
of the electronic revolution basically. We've
seen the recent demise of the Galileo, I mean of the
Mars Observer space probe as it attempted to enter
orbit around Mars. There's also an Air Force probe
called Clementine, which is supposed to do all
sorts of things that are a ridiculously small
amount of money. And I have heard that there is some
thought being given to abolishing NASA, making it
the National Aeronautics Administration, and
letting the Air Force do the stuff. Would you work
for the Air Force under those circumstances? I'd
continue to try to do my science, depending on who
was funding it. I had a lot of colleagues in the
early days that had a very successful
relationship with the Office of Naval Research,
which had a history of funding very fundamental
research into communications theory, radar, and
radio propagation, for instance, from which they
derived a lot of practical benefits, but they put
few constraints on it in those days. I think that
could work. You could imagine, I guess the problem
is you can imagine any number of ways in which
public policy and funding could be conducted. If
you want my opinion about NASA with all of its
faults now versus trying to turn over these things
to the remains of the Star Wars program in the Air
Force, I'd say nuts. I think that wouldn't work at
all. You talk about Clementine being cheap. All
that's cheap is this particular piece of hardware
that one is trying to deal with. The investment to
produce that thing, whatever it is, was huge. That
investment isn't there on that side of the
government either at the moment for future
things. That's going to be tough to prove that to
Congress. They're just going to look at the bottom
line. The reason I mention that is that before
there wasn't an NSA, the Air Force poured an
enormous amount of money into stuff. Kuiper's big
four volumes, that was Air Force funded. My
graduate studies were all funded by the Air Force.
They gave a lot of money to places like McDonnell
Douglas and Louise Young worked there under Gil
Ploss, and there were a lot of infrared spots for
John Strong, and Bill Sinton got a lot of Air Force
money. And the Air Force was ready, willing, and
able to just keep going. They didn't want an NASA.
You know what? NACA, keep doing what it's doing,
and we'll take care of space. I was fundamentally a
policy decision made by the Eisenhower
administration to make civilian space as our
response to Sputnik. And I think it's served the
country well. It's not to say that one couldn't
imagine another structure or even that another
structure might not be desirable now. But at the
moment... I think one of the keys to what you just
said is bucks, and I think that the parts of the DOD
that would like to get involved in this at the
moment are doing so not because there's big bucks
there, but because they're desperately trying to
find a reason for existence for some of the parts
that have wound down as a result of the Cold War
going away.
What we ought to do is schedule another session for
the whole horrid story of the
great Saturn's rings affair with Kuiper and
Crookshank and the MIT crew. But I would just say,
since I was talking about ion volcanism, I thought
I might just share with you a little bit of my
perspective personal history in terms of the time
that Voyager actually discovered the volcanic,
volcanically driven plumes on Io, if you will,
because I don't think it's generally appreciated
that we, in effect, did ourselves in in a very
clever way and prevented the discovery of the
plumes on Io in real time. And To understand this
requires a little bit of knowledge about the way
the real-time imaging systems worked at JPL. The
images come in to the DSN and then went over to the,
at that time, the image processing laboratory for
more detailed work. That's where all the computer
magic, if you will, ended up getting produced on
the pictures, put on disks so we could observe them
on monitors and so forth. with the usual
stretches. People are used to the concept of
stretches and so forth, and in essence
re-exposing the images and looking at different
intensity levels. During the Voyager mission at
Jupiter, for the first time, we had the option of
putting in a little bit of image processing up
front right after the data came in from the DSN so
that we could display in real time on monitors
around the laboratory processed images, not raw
images. And for Io in particular, and the
satellites, we couldn't guarantee that all the
exposures would be just right to come out. In other
words, if we had put up raw images, they would have
looked all right, but they would have looked
washed out. At Jupiter, too. So we developed a
number of these real-time algorithms that we
could put in there so the images on the TV tubes
would look nice to people as they were coming in.
The nature of these algorithms were to take the
faintest few percent of the image and the
brightest few percent of the image and throw it
away and and expand the contrast of what remained
called an auto ends in stretch because you only
have so much available and if you want to expand the
middle range you've got to get rid of the extreme
Now, of course, we weren't actually throwing away
in the data. That was going onto tapes and going on
in for later analysis. But if you think about what
an auto ends in stretch, i.e., throwing away the
bottom few percent of intensity levels and
stretching the picture does for Io, it is the best
anti-volcanic plume filter you could possibly
imagine. The plumes are not very bright. The
plumes were not very bright. So as a result of that,
it turned out that the plumes were crashingly easy
to observe in raw images, even though the surface
of Io wouldn't have been well exposed in those
cases. So in effect, by making the real-time
pictures more accessible to the public, making
them look better on the monitors, we denied all of
us the real-time discovery of the plumes. It's
sort of ironic. The press room would have been, you
know, it would have had the guy from the New York
Times and Jonathan Eberhardt and people like that
would have been the discoverers of the plumes.
They would have seen them first. They were very
easy to find. And it was interesting. The way they
were actually found, as you probably know, was by
an optical navigation engineer looking at a
highly stretched picture. And the reason we
hadn't looked at any raw pictures by that time was
everybody was exhausted after the Jupiter
encounter. Everybody went to bed and slept for 48
hours immediately afterwards. And we came back
in, I think it was the following Monday morning,
I've forgotten the exact time sequence, and we
started, our duty on the imaging team was, okay,
now let's look at each picture, make sure we know
what's in it, and we can kind of, you know, catalog
what's there so we can start the analysis process.
So Joe Verwerk and several of us sat down at one of
the terminals and started going through the
pictures. we'd heard kind of whisperings around
the uh around the hallways that something funny
was there and brad wouldn't tell us what it was what
had happened was linda had linda marvita had found
this thing on this highly stretched overexposed
image of the taken for optical navigation
purposes and she'd finally taken that to brad and
said look you know something funny here we can't
explain and he'd figured out it was probably a
volcanic We were looking for volcanic effects at
that time as a result of Peale et al.' 's prediction
of volcanic effects on Io. It came out just before,
and also because of the way the surface looked. But
nobody at that point had imagined we might
actually see active volcanism. In fact, there was
a predilection not to jump in that direction
because the Mars people with Viking orbiter had
been skunked several times by people making false
claims to having seen active volcanism. So at any
rate, we kind of knew something was up.
We knew something was up, and there were people
scurrying around, and Brad had his door closed and
so forth. So I said, let's sit down and take a look at
the pictures. So we started going through the raw
pictures with Joe sitting there. I'd forgotten
who else was standing around. And Joe pulled up a
picture, which I think probably turned out to be
what we now call Prometheus, with this little
mushroom sticking out the side of the planet. And
Joe looked at it and says, hey, what the hell is
this? And we all looked at it and said, it must be a
volcano going off by a dam. Brad walked out about
that time, and we pulled him over and said, Brad, is
this what we're not supposed to know about or talk
about? He looked at it and says, get that off the
screen. Because these things, of course, could be
seen in other places. Then he looked at it and says,
what? That's another one. So the rest of the day was
spent hunting plumes and cataloging all the
plumes. But in retrospect, it's really ironic
that by applying our neat image processing
techniques early on, we delayed that discovery by
about a week, as it turned out, in terms of when the
data showed up. Although I don't know whether or
not I would have been awake to actually try to do
anything with them if we discovered them during
the encounter. You mentioned the affair of
Saturn's rings. I've already interviewed Dale
Cruikshank, and he was rather short on that. Could
you kind of add a few personal notes on that? Well,
that was when I was a postdoc at MIT, and the offices
in the lab right around where I was, Clark Chapman
and Carl Pilcher were both working. Carl was
getting geared up to do infrared Fourier
transform spectroscopy on satellites and rings,
and ultimately was one of the people that was
involved in the final pegging down of the
identification of water ice on the Galilean
satellites. But what occurred at the time of the
Saturn's ring spectra was that there was a Sky and
Telescope article published with a very recent
spectrum that Dale had taken, I believe. I've
forgotten with what instrument. Compared with a
solar-type star spectrum in the usual classical
astronomical way. And they differed. And the
place of maximum difference was a wavelength that
looked like it might be associated with an ammonia
absorption. And so there was this Sky and
Telescope article, which in effect was the first
publication of the spectrum, which is a little bit
irregular anyway, which identified this as
ammonia absorptions in Saturn's rings. That's
what it was. What happened, I think, probably was
motivated by Carl's beginning his thesis work on
worrying about a similar type spectra for the
Galilean satellites. They looked at this stuff
and they said, well, I can't really make heads or
tails out of this. We've got to back up. This isn't a
ratio spectra. What they were doing was actually
comparing the little wiggly spectra, looking for
the maximum difference. Now, if you think about
it, the difference is not what you want. A lot of
astronomers get used to dealing with differences
as the right quantity, because if you look at
differences in magnitude, it's a ratio of
intensities. Only these were intensities, and
they were looking at the point of maximum
difference. What Clark and Carl did was took and
Xeroxed the spectrum up and digitized it. I've
forgotten exactly how, and took a ratio. The ratio
spectrum showed dips in a different place than the
different spectrum did, if you will. And they
looked at that and said, that doesn't look like
ammonia. And they dug out some recent work at that
time by Hugh Keefer, who had measured the spectrum
of various ices. And he says, that's just water. It
looks just like Keefer's water spectrum. Now,
what happened after that, I was kind of an outside
observer on all of this, if you will. That was my
position as well. I knew everybody involved, but I
And, you know, Carl and Clark sort of asked my
opinion about what sorts of things ought to be
done. Clark was a close friend of Dale
Kirkshank's. And my memory is what happened was he
called up Dale and said, Hey, Dale, you know, that
ain't ammonia, it's water. And he explained it,
and Dale says, By God, you're right, you know, or
something similar. And so then they went into one
of the first DPS meetings was coming up right after
that. And they went into a big soul searching about
what ought to be done in these cases.
Interestingly enough, there was a classic case of
the sentient bands on Mars where a similar thing
had happened. And what ended up happening in that
case was all of the various parties got together
and published a paper with the correct
interpretation, basically. Well, there were
also a few fiascos, like taking some of the Mariner
spacecraft and finding hydrochloric acid and
hydrochloric acid on Mars. Yes. Before my time.
And what is it, helium on where? Venus or Mars or
something like that. Yeah. So at any rate, what I
remember happening was that Clark called up Dale,
and what he suggested was a collaboration. He
says, look, you know, we didn't take these data.
This is your data, Dale, you know. But I think this
is the right interpretation, and, you know, we'd
like to get some credit for it. So they, in essence,
proposed a collaborative paper with taking the
specter and laying it out. And this is hearsay
evidence now is that Dale took this proposal took
this proposal to Kuiper and got a rather emphatic
no back on it. Kuiper's position was apparently
something along the lines of his laboratory had a
program in this area and they would have stumbled
onto this very shortly anyway, and these
interlopers from MIT could go, you know, fly a
kite. If it's not a true story, it should have been
because it's quite characteristic. Quite
characteristic. At any rate, what I do know has
happened is Dale ultimately came back to Dale, to
Clark and Carl, and said, you know, you're right,
but I... but I can't be a co-author with you on the
paper. Kuiper nixed that. And so the end result was
that the paper that actually correctly
identified water ice as a major constituent of the
rings of Saturn based on Dale Kirkshank's
spectrum never had Kirkshank's name on it, which
is a shame in terms of the history of science,
although they gave every possible
acknowledgement to where the spectrum came from
and referenced the Sky and Telescope article.
It's an example of, I think, some of the negative
aspects of the kind of autocratic way in which some
of the old-time planetary astronomers ran their
lab. There's very little flexibility in some
cases, and it wasn't many years after that that
Dale left LPL for a very successful career out in
Hawaii. Well, of course, in those early days,
people like Kuiper They were acting in the
condition of the old-time observatory heads who
were God Almighty. Dr. Professor, there is only
one professor in the department. Well, I never had
the guts to call him Gerard. Fred Whipple is the
only person I know. Well, I'll tell you, I didn't
have that type of relationship with Quaper
either, but Bruce Murray got him on my thesis
committee. I should say, I've forgotten exactly
what they called it at JPL. When we defended our
dissertation, there was a committee that usually
tried to involve a few outside scientists. And
since my thesis was on the Galilean satellites,
Bruce Dragoon and Kuiper into sitting on my
committee. Now, Caltech, these things were not
the Spanish Inquisition type of things that they
are in some departments. That came earlier in the
orals. If you passed your orals and put together a
respectable dissertation, they didn't let you
defend your dissertation unless it was ready to
go. So these things were generally relatively
gentlemanly type affairs. But Jim Westfall was
another member of my committee. And during the
course of my discussion, he started baiting me
about the issue of the sizes of the satellites and
what their albedos were. At this time, there were
no really accurate measurements of the diameters
of the satellites. They're all about one arc
second to one and a half arc seconds in size, as seen
from the Earth, and notoriously hard to measure,
going back to early measurements using a stellar
interferometer by Michelson himself, who didn't
get the right answer, by the way, for reasons I
still don't understand. But Kuiper had made quite
a deal for some years right around that time of
making these very, very accurate, he claimed
very, very precise discometer measurements,
comparing discs under similar illumination in an
eyepiece with what he was seeing under very good
conditions, and was making what a lot of the more
physical astronomers regarded as somewhat
exaggerated claims to the precision with which he
could measure diameters this way. You tried that
with Pluto, too, as well. Yes, all the small
objects. And, you know, I mean, it was a valiant
effort. It was one way to attack the problem. But it
was regarded as highly unphysical by the Caltech
types. And I had very carefully hedged my bets in my
dissertation on this by plotting everything that
had diameter in it with a full range of errors in all
diameter measurements. Albedos and densities
and so forth were big errors. big blobs with error
bars and all of my stuff, because I didn't want to
touch the issue of what was the right numbers,
because I knew we didn't have them. But Westfall
began baiting me a bit, trying to get me to say that
Kuiper's numbers were all hogwash. And I said,
well, you know, what numbers did you use here? How
do you possibly measure something to that
accuracy? And I continued to dance around this
with Gerard sitting there. for the innocent
bystander when the cops shoot him out with the bank
robbers. And I have something very pleasant to say
about Kuiper as a result. About midway through
this, and Westfall, as you know, can get very
aggressive on these types of things. About midway
through this little discussion, Kuiper sat back
and said, well, those were my measurements, and
they don't really affect the results of this
gentleman's dissertation. Let's move on. So I
have a debt to Gerard Kuiper on that score. This is
war story time. You're talking about the
attitudes of traditional astronomers. And my
very first experience could have turned me off
entirely on this whole thing. Very soon after I
started thinking I was going to be doing
observations for part of my thesis work, Bruce had
some time scheduled on the 60-inch at Mount
Wilson. And he said, you go up there with the
equipment. Use it. I can't use it tonight. I'd
never been up there in my life. So he told me how to
get up there, how to get in the gate, how to get to the
monastery, and when dinner was, and told me I'd
better get up there in time for dinner. He didn't
give me any background or any warning or anything.
Both Palomar and Mount Wilson were still very
tradition-bound back in 66, 67. And as it turned
out, there was only one other observer on the
mountain, Olin Egan, I believe, who was on the
100-inch. And, of course, the 100-inch observer
was the king. He sat at the end of the table and rang
the little bell for getting the food and so forth.
And here I was, this first-year graduate student
trying to figure out what to do at the famous Mount
Wilson Observatory, And here's this gruff old
astronomer, Ola Negan, sitting up there. And this
was in the midst of the Vietnam War, of course, and
there was some stuff going on. I'd forgotten
exactly what that was. They did have a TV up there.
And I said, let's turn on the TV and find out what's
happening with the news. And Ola Negan looked at me
and he says, we make our own news up here. I said,
yes, sir. That was my introduction to the
traditional astronomers.
So continue. Okay. The identification of the
Vesta spectrum proceeded very rapidly because we
had in hand at that time the preprint from McCord
and Adams, which they just sent us up from where
they were working on the Apollo samples, a couple
of figures. And what they were doing was comparing
various lunar spectra with various other things.
And some of the things that had been proposed as
having come from the moon or being like the moon, in
fact, were the Eucritic meteorites. So there was a
spectrum sitting in front of us of Nuevo Laredo and
a whole bunch of lunar spectrum, and when Jay Elias
brought in the plot of the data from the Vesta stuff
from the previous month's run or whatever it was,
it laid out with this huge absorption band in it,
and I looked at it, and I looked at this preprint and
figure that McCord had given me, and I said, by God,
it's a basaltic achondrite. And I called up Tom and
said, it's basaltic achondrite, Tom. You know,
it's what it is. Then we proceeded to have a couple
of weeks of very detailed work going back and forth
as to whether we really thought it was a basaltic
achondrite or not. It looks too obvious. It looked
too obvious. And the other thing was that it turned
out that there was another mineral that actually
looked very similar to this, a pure mineral, is
enstatite. that has an absorption feature that
actually seemed to match a little closer. And Tom
was going for, no, it's got to be Instatite. It
can't really be this Eucrite-Pyroxene ratio type
of thing. And it was John Lewis that finally got him
off that after a little bit of acrimony. I don't
know just how much. Lewis pointed out to him that,
yes, Instatite had an absorption band there, but
no meteoritic Instatite had any iron in it. The
Instatite achondrites don't have any iron
content. And so, yeah, you know, an enstatite with
iron in it has a band in the right place, but that
isn't what you get out in meteorites. So we ended up
resolving it in favor of the, of Eucrites being the
best match to the thing. But it was really the most
obvious spectral identification that I've ever
seen. It sat there and sitting there on the old Cal
Comp plotter and comparing it with the Xerox of
Tom's spectra, comparing lunar stuff to Nuevo
Laredo, it was like a dry lab. Well, you should
write a letter.